# Tarpeia

Tarpeia is a mytho-historical preistess who lived in Rome shortly after its
founding. She was executed for betraying the Romans to the neighboring tribe of
Sabines.

## What History Says

[Tarpeia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tarpeia)
[Tarpeian Rock](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tarpeian_Rock)

History says Tarpeia was one of the very first residents of Rome. She was a
Vestal who betrayed her father and early Rome to the Sabines--a tribe with a
significant settlment on a hill to the northeast.

There are variations on the exact story, but the Romans believed that, shortly
after the founding of the Rome, in the final battle following the Rape of the
Sabines, Tarpiea allowed Sabine soliders into the new citadel on the Capitoline
Hill, where the non-combatant population of Rome hid. Romulus had charged
Tarpiea's father with defending this citadel, making her betrayal of Rome also a
betrayal of her father.

After the Sabines secured access to the citadel, Tarpeia sought her payment--the
jewelery the Sabine fighters were known for wearing on their left arms. Instead,
they crushed her by piling their shields (also worn on the left arms) crushing
her. Accounts vary on her precise fate, but in all of them she's crushed. In
some accounts, she--or perhaps, just her corpse--was thrown off of an 80ft cliff
on the Capitoline Hill. In other versions she's buried either at the base In which now bears her name--the Tarpeian Rock.

She would be the first to be executed in this manner. For hundreds of years
subsequently, the Roman state executed traitors and other criminals by throwing
them off this rock.

## Existing Stories

### Roman Legend

The Romans told the story of Tarpeia for hundreds of years. Over 700 years
later, as he consolidated his power to create the office of Emporer, Augustus
ordered the production of coins with his face on one side and an image of
Tarpeia on the other:

[The Sacrilege of Tarpeia](https://coinsweekly.com/The-sacrilege-of-Tarpeia--or-propaganda-under-Augustus/)

By appearing on a coin with Tarpeia, Augustus made further use of her story in
order to communicate:

- I am powerful enough to order coins with my face it.
- I am as much part of Rome and its history as its foundational myths.
- I am happy to be associated with Rome's long tradition of severely punishing
  traitors.

To the Romans, Tarpeia's story illustrated some of their key foundational
values--obedience to father and state--and the capital punishment that follows
when those values are betrayed. The fact that it was the Sabines who executed
her tells us that even though they benefited from the betrayal, they had the
same values. After all, shortly afterwards, the Sabines became Romans.

The Romans cast Tarpeia as unambigously guilty and worhty of being crushed and
thrown off of a cliff. A quick summary:

- Tarpeia betrayed the city in its earliest days.

- Even worse, she betrayed her father, causing him to fail in his obligation to Romulus.

- Even even worse, Tarpeia was driven by greed, asking for the jewelry on Sabine's
  left arms in exchange for access to the citadel.

- Even even even wrose, Tarpeia's (supposed) greed also is incongruous with her
  role as a preistess. The Romans deeply valued piety and the resultant positive
  relationship with the gods. State treachery from anybody was bad, but from a
  priestess of Vesta? Very irreligious and potentially offensive to the gods!

She's the ideal traitor, which ought to inspire some skepticism about these accounts. Moreover, it's noteworthy that her crimes are bad enough that the Sabines feel free to ignore the physical protections that Vestals are supposed to have.

In fact, because the story of Tarpeia is clearly a tool for communicating and
enforcing Roman values, it's valuable to speculate about who she actually was
with a *very* skeptical eye on the Roman legend.

### Dying for Rome

[Dying for Rome](https://www.elisabethstorrs.com/dying-for-rome-tarpeia/)

## New Story Ideas

What kinds of stories could we tell about Tarpeia?

This covers how the Romans saw her along with some ideas for stories you could
tell about her.

### Tarpeia is Righteous

Stepping back, and applying some skepticism to the legend, it's not difficult to
sympathize with Tarpeia.

Here are some elements of a defense of her:

#### Rome is baby

Rome is very young at the time. The legend takes places a couple of years after
Rome's foundation. It'd be surprising if the citadel and its fortification were
even "done" or in a very mature state at this time.

So, this makes Tarpeia's Rome a "brand-new" thing experiement compared to the
following older--and perhaps sacred--things in her life:

- Tarpeia's oath to Vesta and obligations to that order
- The nearby Sabine settlement
- The Sabine families culture and history
- Other older cities in the Latin League (such as Lavinium and Alba Longa),
  which perhaps already had their own epic, legendary founding stories.

In Tarpeia's world, even a well-behaved Rome is a new-novel
settlement-experiement and is appropriately at the bottom of her loyalty
priorities.

#### Rome is sketch

Upon founding the city, wishing to quickly attract a meaningful population of, Romulus presented Rome as an Asylum for criminals and other undesireables.

In fact, it is because the Roman population had such an abundance of single men,
who neighboring settlements deemed unsuitable to marriage for their daughters,
that the Roman's rationalized kidnapping women from neighboring towns.

Why should Tarpiea be loyal to a city who's inhabitants are not virtuous? When
they didn't get the answer they wanted, they used deception and force and the umbrage
a religious of a festival to kidnap the women en mass.

#### Tarpeia's Obligations to Father and Country

[Vestal Virgin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vestal_Virgin)

As a Vestal, she's likely in the middle of some part of a 30-year vow to be the
to serve Vesta, not Rome or even her father.

The Roman version of the Vestal college, established by Romulus's successor
Numa, links the piety of the Vestals to the health of the state. Perhaps the
Romans created the college in a way designed to resolve any conflict or
ambiguity in loyalty.

#### Tarpeia's Obligations to Vesta--Home, Hearth, and Family

Vesta is the goddess of the hearth and home an family. Through ceremonies and
rites, they provide concrete services, such as maintaining a sacred fire from
which ordinary people could light their hearths. They also provide several
religious services, ensuring that the gods, Vesta in particular, will bless the
associated households.

To ordinary people, Rome's kidnapping of the Sabine women was terrifying an
unacceptable. As a Vestal, Tarpeia must have found their disregard for Home,
Hearth and Family as not just wrong, but sacriliegous.
